# HarvardForest
This repository contains the Matlab script and data necessary to generate model results and figures for "Shifts in microbial thermal traits mitigate heat-induced carbon losses in soils" (Brangarí et al., 2025, Global Change Biology).

Global warming is expected to shift carbon from soil organic matter to atmospheric CO2, with microbial communities playing a crucial role in regulating this exchange. While the immediate impact of temperature on microbial functions is well understood and causes soil carbon losses, the long-term response remains unclear, with losses stabilising over time, reducing the overall effect of chronic warming on soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks. Here, we examined the temperature dependence of microbial respiration and growth after nine years of +5 °C warming in a temperate forest. Using these responses and field temperature data, we modelled in situ carbon fluxes and changes in SOC stocks. Results showed that the direct effect of temperature initially increased respiration and growth, projecting a potential 31% SOC stock losses if the trend had persisted. However, the gradual optimization of microbial traits to warming balanced the direct temperature effects, enhanced carbon use efficiency, and offset CO2 emissions. Together, these microbial trait shifts limited the heat-induced SOC stocks losses to 15%, closely aligning with empirical observations. These findings suggest that microbial trait optimisation can moderate carbon emissions, providing a parsimonious mechanistic explanation for observations worldwide and underscoring the need to integrate microbial dynamics into models.
